1.1
---


1.1.1 Structure and Functions of a processor
____________________________________________

Cpu components and their functions:

CU(Control Unit)- Decodes instructions. Controls the flow of data within the CPU. Generates signals to coordinate the actions of other computer components e.g.
                  RAM,I/O devices, ALU(arithmetic logic unit)

ALU(Arithmetic Logic Unit) - Performs arithmetic and logical operations within the CPU. 

Cache - Special high speed memory used to store frequently used instructions and data. 
 
Registers - Temporary storage/memory location inside the CPU used for a single specific purpose.


Registers and their functions:

Acculmulator - Stores the results from calculations. 

Program Counter - Stores the memory address of the next instruction to be fetched from memory.
                  When the memory address is moved to the memory address register, it will not remain empty, as it 
                  will store the memory address of the following instruction by incrementing.

CIR(Current Instruction Register) - Holds the current instruction to be executed, divided up into its operand and opcode.

MAR(Memory Address Register) - Holds the address of a location that is to be read from or written to.

MDR(Memory Data Register) - Temporarily stores data that has been read or data that needs to be written.

Factors which affect cpu performance:

    .clockspeed 
    .number of cores
    .cache size

.The Von Neumann Architecture stores program instructions and data
 in the same memory space and uses shared data buses. This leads to both 
 program instructions and the data competing for more memory, leading to the 
 Von Neumann performance overhead. 

.The Havard Architecture stores program instructions and data into separate memory 
 spaces and uses separate data buses. This allows for data and program instructions to 
 be accessed at the same time. This leads to greater throughput. However, it requires more complex hardware. 



Von Neumann Architecture:

  .Stores data and program instructions in the same physical memory address. 

  .Uses the same data bus for data/program instruction transfer. 

  .2 cycles are required to execute a single instruction. 
 
  .Program instructions and data cannot be accessed simultaneously. 

  .Used in personal and small computers.


Havard Architecture:

  .Program instructions and data are stored in separate physical memory addresses. 

  .Program instructions and data use separate data buses for transfer. 

  .Program instructions require only 1 cycle to execute a single instruction. 

  .Program instructions and data can be accessed simultaneously.

  .Used in signal processing and microcontrollers. 


Bus - A set of parallel wires that connects 2 or more components inside the CPU.

Data Bus - A collection of parallel wires that transfers data and instructions between the CPU, main memory(RAM) and the I/O devices.
           It is bidirectional, meaning that the CPU can send data to memory and vice versa.

Control Bus - A collection of parallel wires that transfers control and command signals between the CPU, main memory and the I/O devices, in order to 
              coordinate all computer operations.

Address Bus - A collection of parallel wires that sends I/O addresses and memory addresses from the CPU to the memory.  


System Bus - A collection of parallel wires that connects the internal components of a computer system such as the CPU and the main memory(RAM).

,The system bus comprises of:

    .data bus
    .control bus
    .address bus

.CPU pipelining is the process of carrying out multiple instructions by overlapping stages of FDE. 

.One reason why CPU pipelining is efficient is that all parts of a processor can be used in an instant. 
 Another reason why it is efficient is that the CPU is not idle, thereby increasing the speed of execution. 
 
CPU Pipelining diagram: 

   Third instruction Second Instruction First Instruction
      Fetch             Decode             Execute 


The computer fetches the next instruction from the main memory RAM.
The program counter stores the memory address of the next instruction to 
be fetched from memory. The content of the program counter pointed to by the
CPU gets transferred to the instruction register within the CPU.

Fetch stage of the FDE(Fetch Decode Execute Cycle): 

  The contents of the PC(Program Counter) are copied to the MAR(Memory Address Register).
  Simultaneously, the program counter's value increments by 1, pointing to the next instruction. 
  A read signal is sent alongside the control bus by the CU(Control Unit) and  a memory address is sent down the address bus
  to the main memory(RAM(Random Access Memory)). The instruction stored at that memory address gets sent down 
  the data bus to the MDR(Memory Data Register). A copy of the instruction stored in the MDR(Memory Data Register)
  gets copied to the CIR(Current Instruction Register).


Decode stage of the FDE(Fetch Decode Execute) Cycle:

  The CU(Control Unit) interprets the instruction stored in the CIR(Current Instruction Register). The CIR(Current Instruction Register)
  is split into 2 parts, the opcode(specifies what actions need to be performed) and the operands(detailing what values and memory addresses are needed). 
  If more data is needed, the CU will prepare the signals for the next step. 


Execute stage of the FDE(Fetch Decode Execute) Cycle: 

  The decoded instruction is carried out. If a calculation needs to be performed, the ALU(Arithmetic Logic Unit) will perform
  logical and arithmetic operations within the CPU and the result is temporarily stored in the acculmulator. The CPU might write back to RAM
  or jump back to a memory address, by changing the value stored in the program counter. 


1.1.2 Types of Processors
_________________________

RISC(Reduced Instruction Set Computer): 

  In these processors, there is a small instruction set. Each instruction takes one cycle and requires approximately 1 line of code. 
  Machine code instruction is usually fixed-length.
  
CISC(Complex Instruction Set Computer): 

  In these processors, there is a large instruction set. These instructions are directly embedded into the hardware. The instruction 
  is written in as few lines as possible. They are used in embedded systems and microcontrollers. The machine code instructions are variable length.

Advantages of CISC(Complex Instruction Set Computer): 

  .Quicker to code programs in. 

  .The compiler does very little work to translate high-level programming language code into  
   machine code. 

  .The code is relatively short, meaning very little RAM is required to store the instructions. 

    .CISC code can have fewer machine code instructions to be needed from the same task.
    .CISC instructions are often variable-length and some take several clock cycles to complete.
    .CISC instruction sets are common in many PC processors due to backwards compatibility

Advantages of RISC(Reduced Instruction Set Computer): 
   
  . The hardware is simple to build, requiring fewer circuits to carry out complex instructions. 

  .Since each instruction takes the same amount of time, cpu pipelining is possible. 

  .RISC's use of RAM and software allows for better performance at lower costs. 

  . Uses simpler control hardware which can reduce power use and heat output. 

  



A GPU acts as a coprocessor, offloading processor-intensive mathematical calculations
from the CPU, allowing it to handle general purpose tasks. 

A GPU's many simple processing units are optimized for high-throughput parallel work on similar calculation. 

Data Transfer between CPU and GPU  takes time. Branching/dependencies underuse parallel hardware. 

GPU usecases: 

  .Scientific modelling and simulations. 

  .Video and image processing and rendering. 

  .Datamining and cryptocurrency mining. 

  .AI training and and machine learning. 

Unlike a CPU which comprises of individual cores, the
GPU is made up of millions of smaller, simpler cores designed to handle 
identical operations at the same time. 


SIMD(Single Instruction, Multiple Data) - A computing technique where the GPU
                                          applies the mathematical operation simultaneously
                                          across a large block of data. 

Multi Core processors refer to computer systems with more than one processing unit. 
So, in theory it means that multiple jobs can be executed at once. However, in reality,
software has to be programmed specifically to carry out multiple jobs at once. Many forms 
of legacy software do not support this, showing that multi-core processors and parallel processing 
have their limitations. 


Parallel processing - A computing technique that enables a single program to be split into threads/sub-tasks 
in order to be executed at the same time, reducing completion time. 

MUltitasking - Enables different software to run at the same time on separate cores without any performance degradation. 

Background task isolation - It allocates background tasks to separate cores, without slowing down foreground applications 
   
It maintains computer functionality and maintainability, if one program fails the other cores will continue to work on the
ongoing tasks.

Mutli-core CPU designs are designed to be avoid much higher clockspeed, which creates more heat. 

1.1.3 - Input, Output, Storage
------------------------------

    Input Devices     Output Devices     Storage Devices

     Keyboard           Monitor          HDD 
     Mouse              Printer          CD/DVD 
     Microphone         Speakers         Memory Card
     Scanner            Projector        USB Drive 
     Webcam             Headphones       SSD 





Memory Management Techniques:

  1. Paging 

  2. Segmentation 

Paging: 

  A memory management technique where available memory is divided into fixed-sized chunks. 
  Each page is allocated with a memory address. Paging does not display the contents. 

Segmentation: 

  A memory management technique where available memory is divided into different lengths of memory chunks. 
  It contains both memory addresses and content of the pages. 


Virtual memory is a memory management technique used by a computer's operating system 
to make the computer appear to have more RAM than it actually does. It allows programs to run even 
if there isn't enough RAM available. 

Magnetic Storage: 

  Speed - high read/write speeds. 

  Durability - Can be easily damaged through dropping. The read head can easily get damaged. 

  Capacity - 750GB - 3TB(3000 GB)

  Portability - Poor portability 

  Reliability - Can be used again and again. Can last for a good few years. 

  Use - Used in desktop computers to store large files and programs. 


Optical Storage: 

  Use - Storage of small media files and documents 

  Speed - moderate read/write speed. 

  Portability - Very portable and light 

  Capacity - 650MB (small)

  Reliability - CD-Rs can only be written one, but are used over and over again. 
                CD-RW can be used over and over again. 

  Durability - Scratches can damage the data.

 
Solid State Storage: 

  Use - Desktop computers, laptop and tablets to store large files, programs and operating systems. 

  Capacity - 64GB to 840GB(moderate)

  Speed - Super Fast read/write speeds 

  Portability - Very small and lightweight, making it extremely portable. 

  Durability  - Has no moving parts making it very durable 

  Reliability - Can be used over and over again. 


Advantages of the Cloud(Virtual Storage): 

   1. Accessibility - Files can be accessed from anywhere with an internet connection. 
   
   2. Collaboration - Multiple users can share and edit files easily. 

   3. Scalability - Storage space can be increased on demand without new hardware. 

   4. Backup & recovery - Reduces risk of data loss if local devices fail. 


Disadvantages of the Cloud(Virtual Storage): 

   1. Accessibility - Storage is unusable without a stable connection. 

   2. Security risks - Data may be vulnerable to hacking or breaches. 

   3. Ongoing Costs - Providers often charge subscription fees for large storage. 

   4. Performance Issues - Uploading/Downloading files can be slower than local storage.


Virtual Storage: 

  Use - Used to store documents and media files online. This means that you can 
        go to another computer and access your files provided that you have 
        internet access. 

  Capacity - Unlimited, provided you can pay for it. 

  Speed -  Depends on network/bandwidth speeds. 
           Poor bandwidth can cause uploading and downloading of large 
           files to take a long time. 

  Portability - It is virtual so you don't have anything physical to move around. 

  Durability and Reliabilty - Providing that you keep up with payments and the company 
                              looks after their storage devices - very durable and reliable. 


Scheduling - The task of allocating CPU processor time amongst all running programs.

What is the need for scheduling?: 

   The operating system of a multi-tasking computer can have many programs running at the 
   same time in memory. Each program is expected to run without any noticable  
   delay. This is made possible by using scheduling. 


Examples of pre-emptive scheduling techniques: 

   1. Shortest remaining time 
   
   2. Round Robin. 

   3. Multilevel feedback queues  

Examples of Non pre-emptive scheduling techniques: 

    1. First come First Served, Shortest Job 

Scheduling Techniques: 
  
  1. First Come First Served. 

  2. Shortest Job First. 
 
  3. Shortest Time Remaining. 
   
  4. Round Robin 

  5. Multi-level 

Disadvantages and Advantages of First Come First Served: 

   .It is a simple algorithm to implement. It also ensures that once a process starts, it will run to completion 
    in minimal time.

   .Once a job starts , it prevents other jobs from being processed until it is completed. 

   .A job that needs to access a slow resource e.g. a printer, wastes processor time while it is waiting for that resource 

   .It does not consider that some processors are short and others long. A long process will delay all the processes in the queue behind it



Disadvantages and Advantages Of Shortest Job: 

   .Ensures the maximum number of jobs are completed.
   .It ensures that short jobs aren't kept waiting while long processes tie up CPU resources. 
   .It minimises the average time a process takes to complete. 

   .The scheduler can only estimate how long a job will take to complete, but its estimation could be wrong. 
   .Particularly long jobs may take a long time to complete if shorter jobs continue to jump "the queue".


Disadvantages and Advantages of Round Robin: 

    1. It is simple to implemment. Round Robin is a good algorithm if all processes are more or less of similar priority and size. 
 
    2. It does not consider that some processes are short and others are long. This makes Round Robin an inefficient way to allocate time and resources.


Disadvantages and Advantages of Multi-level: 

 .Makes sophisticated use of process priority. 
  
 .It ensures that higher priority processes run on time. 

 .Complex to implement. 

 .Not very efficient if all jobs have similar priority. 




    


Different Types of OS: 

  1. Distributed 

  2. Embedded 

  3. Multi-tasking 

  4. Multi-User 

  5. Real-Time 

Multi-tasking System: 

  A single processor can appear to do more than 1 task simultaneously 
  by scheduling processor time while other processes are running in the 
  background. 

Distributed Operating Systems: 

  A distributed OS can coordinate the processing of a single job 
  across multiple computers. 

  The distribution of tasks is coordinated by the OS passing instructions 
  
  between computers. 


Embedded systems: 

 An embedded operating system is designed for a dedicated, 
 single-purpose within a larger mechanical/electrical hardware 
 system. These systems operate within strictly limited resources, such as minimal power and processing power. 


Real-time Operating Systems: 

  Real-time Operating Systems must respond extremely quickly to inputs. 
  
  May need to cope with many inputs simultaneously. 

  Real-time operating systems are usually seen in safety-critical environments. 

  If a hardware component fails, the OS must have failsafe to detect this 
  and respond appropriately. 

  There is hardware redundancy meaning that crucial components are duplicated
  in the case that one fails.

Virtual Machine: 

  .Refers to software that allows you to run an operating system within another. 

  .It is used to emulate machines. 

  .A virtual machine can execute intermediate code 
   e.g. Java virtual machine executes java bytecode. 

Interrupt - A signal sent to the CPU from the hardware or the software.

Interrupts: 

   This is when the CPU needs to stop what it is doing and deal with something 
   else which is most important. 

   Interrupt Signals:

      .An I/O devices send an interrupt 
      .The printer runs out of paper 
      .An error occurs in a program 
      .A scheduling interrupt from the internal clock 
      .Power Failure 

The CPU checks at the end of each clock cycle if there are any interrupts to be processed. 
If an interrupt is detected, the CPU will stop what it is doing and pushes the current contents 
of its registers onto the stack. When the processing has finished, the values can be popped from the stack(topmost value is removed) 
and reloaded into the CPU. 


An ISR(Interrupt Service Routine) is a program that the computer executes when an interrupt occurs. 
It tells the CPU how to respond to the event that triggered the interrupt. 

Instruction Set - The complete collection of machine-code instructions a processor can understand and execute

Doubling the number of cores, does not increase CPU performance as many programs 
are not designed to utilise multiple cores. It also takes alot of time for the 
cores to communicate with each other. Also, sequential/dependent work, overheads 
or memory limits reduce parallelism. 

CISC code can have fewer machine code instructions to be needed from the same task.

CISC instructions are often variable-length and some take several clock cycles to complete.

CISC instruction sets are common in many PC processors due to backwards 
compatibility



Examples of utility software: 
  
  .Disc Defragmentation 
  
  .Compression Software 

  .Backup  

  .Encryption software 

  .
