
Problem
-------

Your computer is eating up too much RAM(perhaps through memory-intensive processes), your PC is encountering thermal throttling, your fan rpm is sounding like a v8 car engine ,your disk usage is full and worst of 
all; the computer you daily drive is slow. But here is the actual worst part: You have zero to no clue of what is actually causing this. 


Now in order to amend all these issues, one must use a software solution. The reason why a  software solution is the most 
viable way is that it tracks real-time information, meaning it can  update system stats such as how much memory is available, 
how much memory is freed or how much of it is cached. From a programmer's perspective, it would be completely ineffective 
to track core computer stats on paper. One reason behind this, is that the system stats are constantly changing. They are dynamic,
not static. Take for instance, memory. Memory has to be constantly allocated and freed when dealing with a plethora of applications in 
order to manage computing resources sustainably. To manually track this by hand, would be a daunting and arduous task as this way of approaching 
the problem is inefficient as it only provides a snapshot of the processes on your system and would be utterly time-consuming. (Similar to the ps coreutil in linux)


Who would use this solution?
----------------------------

This GUI system monitoring tool would prove to be the most ideal for computer enthusiasts/gearheads,gamers or just a regular linux user wanting a machine with fast response times.


From my point of view, this system monitoring tool would cater to the needs of gamers. On an average, most gamers tend  to care about the raw performance of their 
videogame running on their PCs(Personal Computers) so that they can play casually or competitively at a smooth FPS. If there were heavy daemon processes running 
on the machine, high CPU/GPU load, while the person is playing, it could lead to frame drops, visual artifacts, in game stuttering during voicelines or low-fidelity graphics, thereby 
ruining the overall player experience. The GUI system monitoring tool can play a part in rectifying this issue by ascertaining which applications are taking up 
the most system resources, enabling the end-user to kill the correct processes in order to free up more system resources or set a clockspeed limit range e.g. 
(800 Mhz - 2000 Mhz). This is because a high clockspeed has a knockon effect on other computer components as shown by the diagram below.. 

HIGH CPU CLOCKSPEED ---------> INSTRUCTIONS PROCESSED FASTER  ------------> HIGH POWER CONSUMPTION ----------------> HEAT ---> HIGH FAN RPM --------> LOW BATTERY LIFE 

This software tool could also be used by computer enthusiasts. This is mainly because computer enthusiasts care about every bit of performance they can squeeze 
into their machines. My system monitoring tool would help them by showing vital information such as CPU temperatures, CPU frequencies, fan speeds or whether 
their CPU is idle on a graphical dashboard, thereby helping them to improve the performance of their  machine. 



Existing/similar Solutions: 

 1. Task Manager 

 2. S-tui 

 3. Top 


Task Manager 
------------ 

Historical Overview
-------------------

    The original version of the iconic task manager application was first written by Dave Plummer in 1995 and ran 
    natively on the windows NT kernel. His reason for creating the task manager was because he missed the command utilties of ps and top
    found on unix-like operating systems. After creating a rough build of it, Dave Plummer brought it to work and shared it with his fellow
    co-workers. The Windows NT designer Dave Cutler liked the program and gave Dave Plummer permission to add it to the window source
    library.  

Technical Explanation
---------------------

    The legacy version of task manager was written in 32-bit C++ and avoided the C runtime library alongside with functions for 
    dynamically allocating memory on the heap e.g. malloc, calloc, realloc. Dave Plummer had the program designed for absolute
    optimisation. This was evidenced as the final program was less than 85KB and was designed to run even when system resources 
    were starved. To add on, it fetched all system information in one go. 


TOP
--- 

Historical Overview 
___________________

The conceptual design of top actually didn't  come from Unix, the precursor to most operating systems today. 
Instead, it was originally invented by DEC(Digital Equipment Coporation) for their OS called VMS(Virtual Memory System)
which ran on VAX minicomputers. Then, in April 1984, a student at the Rice University set out to make a clone of the program. 
He wrote the first implementation of top for BSD 4.1 UNIX.

Technical Explanation
---------------------

Top is a unix command which is designed to provide real-time information about processes. 
This includes process state, which user started the process, how much of the CPU 
is it using and how long the CPU has spent on that process. In addition to this, it also shows a 
PID(process ID) column associated with each process which is assigned by the init system as well 
as how much physical,shared and virtual memory it is taking up. The top command displays process
data In a tabular format. Above the tabular data, are more system stats such as uptime(how long the system has been running for), 
the average system load in the last 1 minute, 5 minutes and 15 minutes. To add on, it also shows how many tasks are running in total
as well as stating how many processes were in said state. 

S-tui 
----- 

Technical Explanation 
---------------------
S-tui is an open-source github project written in python which displays system stats in a graph-like format. 
This includes information about cpu sensor temperatures, fan rpm, individual core clockspeeds. It uses the python 
dependencies of psutil and urwid. 





 
