SI(System International) Units: 

  1. Light Intensity(candela)
  2. Temperature - Kelvin 
  3. Time - seconds 
  4. current - amperes 
  5. amount - moles 
  6. length - metres 
  7. Mass - kilograms 

Amplitude - The maximum displacement of a wave from its equilibrium position. Measured in metres. 

Frequency - The number of waves/oscillations that pass through a specific point per second.  Measured in Hertz.

Wavelength - The length of one complete oscillation. Measured in metres 

Period - The time it takes for one oscillation. 

phase - The position of a point on a wave cycle. 

phase difference - How much a particle/wave lags behind another particle/wave. 

specific charge - The charge to mass ratio of a charged ion, nucleus or atom. 

rest energy - The energy of a particle when it is at rest. 

rest mass - The mass of a particle when it is at rest. 

electronvolt - A measure of the energy of an electron when a particle moves in a P.D of 1V.

annhilation - The process where an anti-particle and particle come together and annihilate 
              each other. 2 gamma photons are produced and move in opposite directions to conserve momentum. 

Prefix Units:

  Tera - 10^12
  femto - 10^-15 
  milli - 10^-3 
  base - 10^0 = 1 
  pico - 10^-12  
  giga - 10^9 
  Mega - 10^6 
  Kilo - 10^3 
 
photons - Discrete packets of EM radiation called quanta. 
 
Transverse waves are particles/fields that are perpendicular to the direction of energy transfer. 

.All electromagnetic waves in the EM spectrum are transverse. 

.In a vacuum, all EM waves travel at the speed of light - 3 x 10^8 ms-1 

.Longitudinal wave are particles/fields that are parallel to the direction of energy transfer. 

.Ultrasound and sound are examples of longitudinal waves. 

.Compression - Regions of longitudinal waves where air particles are closely packed together.

rarefaction - Regions of longitudinal waves where air particles are far apart from one another. 


antiparticle - A particle that has the rest mass as its regular matter counterpart, but has a different quantum number and opposite charge. 
