 

1a)During the fetch stage, the program counter stores the memory address of the next instruction to 
be fetched from memory. The program counter transfers the memory address of the instruction to the
MAR(Memory Address Register). The program counter increments, pointing to the next instruction. An read signal is
sent down the control bus. A memory address is sent down the address bus. The data stored at this memory address 
gets sent down the data bus to the MDR(Memory Data Register). The MDR(Memory Data Register) copies the instruction 
over to the CIR(Current Instruction Register)

1b) program counter


1c) Pipelining improves the performance of the CPU by overlapping multiple stages of the FDE cycle. 
    This means the first instruction can be executed, the following instruction can be decoded and the 
    instruction prior to that can be fetched. CPU pipelining ensures that the CPU is not idle and 
    all parts of the CPU are available in an instant. 


2)   A - data bus 

     B - MAR(Memory Address Register)

     C - PC(Program Counter)

     D - MDR(Memory Data Register) 

     E - Acculmulator


3) The Von Neumann Architecture stores the program instructions and data 
   in the same physical memory address space and uses shared data buses for 
   data transfer. Whereas the Havard Architecture stores the program instructions 
   and data in separate physical memory addess spaces and uses separate data buses 
   for data transfer. In the Havard Architecture, only 1 cycle is required to 
   execute a single instruction. Whereas in the Von Neumann Architecture, multiple 
   cycles are required to execute a single instruction. In a Von Neumann architecture, 
   instructions cannot be processed simultaneously. Whereas in a Havard Architecture, 
   instructions can be processed simultaneously. A benefit of using the Havard Architecture 
   is that it leads to greater throughput. A benefit of using the Von Neumann Architecture 
   is that it is easier to implement.

5bi) The acculmulator is used to store initial/intermediate values used by the ALU. During the execute stage, 
    the ALU temporarily stores the results of calculations in the acculmulator. 

5bii) The program counter copies the memory address to the MAR(Memory Address Register). The program counter 
     increments, pointing to the next instruction. 

5biii) MAR(Memory Address Register), MDR(Memory Data Register) CIR(Current Instruction Register)
   
9b(ii) RAM is the short-term memory of the computer. ROM is the long-term memory of the computer. 
       RAM is volatile, meaning that data is lost when the computer is switched off. ROM is non-volatile, 
       meaning the data is retained even when the computer is switched off. RAM stores the currently 
       running instructions and data. Whereas ROM stores the bootstrap/startup instructions. 




